---
description: Using volumes
title: Volumes
keywords: storage, persistence, data persistence, volumes
---

Volumes are the preferred mechanism for persisting data generated by and used
by Kleene containers. While [nullfs mounts](nullfs-mounts.md) are dependent on the
directory structure of the host machine, volumes are managed by
Kleene. Advantages of using volumes over nullfs mounts:

- Volumes are easy to back up or migrate.
- Volumes are stored within the Kleene root and can thus be managed together
  with the Kleene installation.
- You can manage volumes using Klee.
- New volumes can have their content pre-populated by a container.

Volumes are based on nullfs-mounts and can be seen as managed but less flexible
version of bind mounts.

See the [`container create` command](/reference/klee/container_create/#specifying-mounts)
for details on how to mount volumes with Klee.

When you create a volume, it is stored within a directory on the Kleene
host. When you mount the volume into a container, this directory is what is
mounted into the container. This is similar to the way that nullf mounts work,
except that volumes are managed by Kleene and are isolated from the core
functionality of the host machine.

## Good use cases for volumes

Volumes are the preferred way to persist data in Kleene containers and services.
Some use cases for volumes include:

- Sharing data among multiple running containers. Multiple
  containers can mount the same volume simultaneously, either read-write or
  read-only. Volumes are only removed when you explicitly remove them.

- When the Kleene host is not guaranteed to have a given directory or file
  structure. Volumes help you decouple the configuration of the Kleene host
  from the container runtime.

- When you need to back up, restore, or migrate data from one Kleene
  host to another, volumes are a better choice. You can stop containers using
  the volume, then back up the volume's directory. See the
  [Kleene and ZFS](/operation/zfs) section for details.

## Create and manage volumes

Unlike a bind mount, you can create and manage volumes outside the scope of any
container.

**Create a volume**:

```console
$ klee volume create my-vol
my-vol
```

**List volumes**:

```console
$ klee lsv
 VOLUME NAME   CREATED
─────────────────────────────
 my-vol        6 minutes ago
```

**Inspect a volume**:

Using `klee volume inspect my-vol` we get

```json
{
  "mountpoints": [],
  "volume": {
    "created": "2024-02-29T14:54:05.317207Z",
    "dataset": "zroot/kleene/volumes/my-vol",
    "mountpoint": "/zroot/kleene/volumes/my-vol",
    "name": "my-vol"
  }
}
```

Note that the list of mountpoints is empty since we have not mounted it into any
containers yet.

**Remove a volume**:

```console
$ klee volume rm my-vol
my-vol
```

**Prune volumes:**

```console
$ klee volume prune
WARNING! This will remove all unused volumes.
Are you sure you want to continue? [y/N]: y

```

## Start a container with a volume

If you start a container with a volume that doesn't yet exist, Klee creates
the volume for you. The following example mounts the volume `myvol2` into
`/app/` in the container.

```console
$ klee run -d --name devtest --mount myvol2:/app FreBSD:latest
```

Use `klee volume inspect myvol2` to verify that the volume was created and mounted
correctly:

```json
{
  "mountpoints": [
    {
      "container_id": "cc1ea0ff3f5a",
      "destination": "/app",
      "read_only": false,
      "source": "myvol2",
      "type": "volume"
    }
  ],
  "volume": {
    "created": "2024-02-29T15:07:02.291441Z",
    "dataset": "zroot/kleene/volumes/myvol2",
    "mountpoint": "/zroot/kleene/volumes/myvol2",
    "name": "myvol2"
  }
}
```

This shows the correct source and destination, and that the mount is read-write.

Stop the container and remove the volume. Note volume removal is a separate
step.

```console
$ klee container stop devtest
cc1ea0ff3f5a
$ klee container rm devtest
cc1ea0ff3f5a
$ klee volume rm myvol2
myvol2
```

### Populate a volume using a container

If you start a container which creates a new/empty volume, and the container
has files or directories in the directory to be mounted such as `/app/`,
the directory's contents are copied into the volume (using `cp -a`).
The container then mounts and uses the volume, and other containers which use
the volume also have access to the pre-populated content.
If you remove volume-mount from the container, the original 'container-local'
files will be visible within the container again.

To illustrate this, the following example starts an `nginx` container and
populates the new volume `nginx-vol` with the contents of the container's
`/usr/local/www/nginx` directory. This is where Nginx stores its default HTML
content.

The `nginx` image can be built by like this

```console
$ cat Dockerfile
FROM FreeBSD:latest
RUN pkg install -y nginx
$ klee build -t nginx:latest .
```

and the `nginx` container run using:

```console
$ klee run --name nginxtest --mount nginx-vol:/usr/local/www/nginx nginx ls /usr/local/www/nginx
835b746a9e0d
created execution instance bd16b0b23a25
50x.html
EXAMPLE_DIRECTORY-DONT_ADD_OR_TOUCH_ANYTHING
index.html

executable bd16b0b23a25 and its container exited with exit-code 0
```

and verify that the files have appeared on the volume

```console
$ ls /zroot/kleene/volumes/nginx-vol/
50x.html                                     EXAMPLE_DIRECTORY-DONT_ADD_OR_TOUCH_ANYTHING index.html
```


Then run the following commands to clean up
the containers and volumes. Note volume removal is a separate step.

```console
$ klee container rm nginxtest
835b746a9e0d
$ klee volume rm nginx-vol
nginx-vol
```

## Use a read-only volume

For some development applications, the container needs to write into the
mount so that changes are propagated back to the Kleene host. At other times,
the container only needs read access to the data. Multiple
containers can mount the same volume. You can simultaneously mount a
single volume as `read-write` for some containers and as `read-only` for others.

The following example modifies the one above but mounts the directory as a read-only
volume, by adding `:ro` after the mount point within the container.

```console
$ klee run --name=nginxtest --mount nginx-vol:/usr/local/www/nginx:ro nginx:latest
```

Use `klee container inspect nginxtest` to verify that the read-only mount was created
correctly. Look for the `container_mountpoints` section:

```json
  "container_mountpoints": [
    {
      "container_id": "c0c874965b50",
      "destination": "/usr/local/www/nginx",
      "read_only": true,
      "source": "nginx-vol",
      "type": "volume"
    }
  ]
```

Stop and remove the container, and remove the volume. Volume removal is a
separate step.

```console
$ klee container stop nginxtest

$ klee container rm nginxtest

$ klee volume rm nginx-vol
```
